Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the anticholinergic drugs.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the anticholinergic drugs. Define them and outline their
classification and uses in anaesthesia.
The anticholinergic, or antimuscarinic,
drugs are an important group in anaesthesia, with several long-established uses,
and an understanding of them begins with their mechanism,
classification and indications, so it is worth setting out.
The anticholinergic drugs are antagonists at the muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors; they block the actions of acetylcholine — the transmitter of the
parasympathetic nervous system — at the muscarinic receptors of the heart,
the glands and the smooth muscle, and so produce effects opposite to
parasympathetic stimulation.
The three agents used in anaesthesia are atropine,
glycopyrronium — known in American usage as glycopyrrolate — and hyoscine,
also called scopolamine.
They differ in important ways: atropine and hyoscine are tertiary amines,
which cross the blood-brain barrier and so have central effects,
while glycopyrronium is a quaternary amine,
which does not cross and so lacks central effects.
Their principal uses in anaesthesia are several: to treat or prevent bradycardia,
by blocking the vagal slowing of the heart;
to reduce secretions — the antisialagogue effect, drying the airway secretions,
formerly important and still used, for instance,
before awake fibreoptic intubation; and, importantly,
in combination with the anticholinesterase neostigmine when reversing neuromuscular
block, to block the unwanted muscarinic effects of the neostigmine.
Hyoscine also has antiemetic and sedative uses.
So the anticholinergic drugs — atropine, glycopyrronium,
and hyoscine — are antagonists at the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors,
blocking parasympathetic effects on the heart, glands and smooth muscle;
atropine and hyoscine being tertiary amines with central effects and glycopyrronium
a quaternary amine without; used to treat bradycardia, to reduce secretions,
and to block the muscarinic effects of neostigmine in reversal — an important
anaesthetic drug group defined by their muscarinic antagonism.
Describe the pharmacological effects of the anticholinergic drugs on the various
organ systems.
The effects of the anticholinergic drugs follow logically from the blockade of the
parasympathetic, muscarinic actions throughout the body, and knowing them,
system by system, is the key to understanding both their therapeutic uses and their
side effects, so it is worth describing.
Because they block the muscarinic actions of acetylcholine,
their effects are the opposite of parasympathetic stimulation, across the systems.
On the heart, they block the vagal slowing,
so they increase the heart rate — a tachycardia — and speed atrioventricular
conduction; this is the basis of their use against bradycardia,
atropine being the more powerful for this.
On the glands, they reduce secretion — the salivary, bronchial,
sweat and other glands — causing a dry mouth and reduced airway secretions,
the antisialagogue effect, glycopyrronium being particularly effective and
longer-acting.
On the smooth muscle, they cause relaxation: relaxing the bronchial smooth muscle,
with some bronchodilatation; relaxing the gut, reducing its motility;
and relaxing the bladder.
On the eye, they cause dilatation of the pupil — mydriasis — and paralysis of
accommodation, and may raise the intraocular pressure, a concern in glaucoma.
On the central nervous system, the tertiary amines that cross the blood-brain
barrier — atropine and, more, hyoscine — have central effects: sedation, amnesia,
antiemesis, and, in excess, confusion and delirium; glycopyrronium,
being quaternary, has none of these.
So the anticholinergic drugs, blocking muscarinic actions,
produce a tachycardia and faster conduction in the heart,
reduced glandular secretions with a dry mouth and airway,
relaxation of the bronchial, gut and bladder smooth muscle,
pupillary dilatation with paralysed accommodation and raised intraocular pressure,
and, for the tertiary amines, central effects of sedation, amnesia, antiemesis and,
in excess, delirium — a pattern following from muscarinic blockade,
underlying their uses and side effects.
Compare atropine, glycopyrronium and hyoscine.
The three anticholinergic drugs used in anaesthesia,
though sharing the same basic mechanism,
differ in important properties that determine their selection,
so a comparison of them is worth drawing out.
They share the muscarinic-blocking mechanism but differ chiefly in their chemistry
— and so their central effects — and in the balance and duration of their actions.
Atropine is a tertiary amine, which crosses the blood-brain barrier;
it has a relatively rapid onset and a strong action on the heart,
making it the agent of choice for the acute treatment of bradycardia and in
resuscitation; it has central effects,
and in excess can cause a central anticholinergic syndrome;
its action is of moderate duration.
Glycopyrronium is a quaternary amine, which does not cross the blood-brain barrier,
so it has no central effects; it has a relatively slower onset but a longer
duration than atropine, a strong antisialagogue, drying action,
and a somewhat less abrupt effect on the heart;
it is favoured as the antisialagogue and as the agent combined with neostigmine for
reversal, its duration matching that of neostigmine,
and it is preferred where central effects are to be avoided, as in the elderly.
Hyoscine is a tertiary amine with the most marked central effects:
it is a strong antisialagogue, but is notable for its central actions — sedation,
amnesia and antiemesis — which are exploited,
for instance against motion sickness and as a premedicant,
but which include a risk of confusion and excitement, particularly in the elderly.
So atropine, a tertiary amine, is the rapid, strong cardiac agent for bradycardia,
with central effects; glycopyrronium, a quaternary amine,
is the longer-acting antisialagogue without central effects,
favoured with neostigmine and in the elderly; and hyoscine, a tertiary amine,
is notable for its marked central effects — sedation,
amnesia and antiemesis — with a risk of confusion;
a comparison determining their selection.
Describe the use of anticholinergic drugs with anticholinesterases in the reversal
of neuromuscular block.
One of the most important uses of an anticholinergic drug in anaesthesia is its
combination with an anticholinesterase, such as neostigmine,
when reversing neuromuscular block,
and the rationale for this follows from the actions of the anticholinesterase,
so it is worth describing.
When neostigmine is given to reverse a non-depolarising neuromuscular block,
it acts by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase,
so that acetylcholine accumulates — at the neuromuscular junction,
where it competes with the blocking drug to restore transmission,
the desired effect; but also, unavoidably,
at all the other sites where acetylcholine acts,
including the muscarinic receptors of the parasympathetic system.
So the accumulated acetylcholine produces unwanted muscarinic effects:
a bradycardia, which may be severe; increased secretions; bronchoconstriction;
and increased gut activity.
To prevent these, an anticholinergic drug is given together with the neostigmine,
blocking the muscarinic receptors so that the unwanted muscarinic effects are
prevented, while the nicotinic effect at the neuromuscular junction — which the
anticholinergic does not block — proceeds to reverse the block.
The anticholinergic is chosen and timed to match the anticholinesterase:
glycopyrronium is commonly paired with neostigmine,
as its onset and duration match reasonably,
giving smoother cardiovascular control than atropine; atropine,
with its faster onset, is sometimes paired with the faster-acting edrophonium.
So when an anticholinesterase such as neostigmine is used to reverse neuromuscular
block, it causes acetylcholine to accumulate not only at the neuromuscular
junction, reversing the block, but also at the muscarinic receptors,
causing unwanted bradycardia, secretions and bronchoconstriction;
so an anticholinergic — commonly glycopyrronium with neostigmine,
or atropine with edrophonium — is given alongside to block these muscarinic
effects, matched in onset and duration to the anticholinesterase — a use following
directly from the actions of the anticholinesterase.
Describe the central anticholinergic syndrome and anticholinergic toxicity.
An excess of anticholinergic effect, or the central effects of the tertiary amines,
can cause a recognisable toxic syndrome, of relevance in anaesthesia,
so it is worth describing.
The toxicity of the anticholinergic drugs is an exaggeration of their normal
effects, from an excess of the drug, from sensitivity,
or from the additive effect of several drugs with anticholinergic actions.
The peripheral features are those of excessive muscarinic blockade: a tachycardia;
a dry mouth and skin, with an inability to sweat and so a rise in temperature;
flushed, hot skin; dilated pupils with blurred vision; urinary retention;
and reduced gut activity.
The central features — occurring with the tertiary amines that cross the
blood-brain barrier, atropine and hyoscine,
but not the quaternary glycopyrronium — constitute the central anticholinergic
syndrome: a disturbance of the central nervous system, with restlessness,
agitation, confusion, hallucinations and delirium,
which may progress to drowsiness, and, in severe cases, coma.
This is summarised in the classic description of the toxic patient as hot, dry,
flushed, with dilated pupils, and confused or delirious.
The elderly are particularly susceptible to the central effects.
The management is largely supportive, with removal of the cause; in severe cases,
the central effects can be reversed by an anticholinesterase that crosses the
blood-brain barrier, physostigmine, which raises the central acetylcholine.
So anticholinergic toxicity is an exaggeration of the drugs' effects —
peripherally, a tachycardia, dry hot flushed skin with hyperthermia,
dilated pupils, urinary retention and reduced gut activity; and centrally,
with the tertiary amines, the central anticholinergic syndrome of confusion,
agitation, hallucinations and delirium, to which the elderly are susceptible;
managed supportively, with physostigmine reversing severe central effects — a
syndrome of relevance in anaesthesia.
Describe the other clinical uses of the anticholinergic drugs.
Beyond their core anaesthetic uses,
the anticholinergic drugs have a range of other clinical applications,
following from their actions on the various systems,
and an awareness of these completes the picture, so it is worth outlining them.
Their uses follow from their organ effects.
From their cardiac action, they are used to treat bradycardia and certain
conduction disturbances, atropine being a standard drug in the management of
symptomatic bradycardia and in resuscitation algorithms.
From their antisialagogue action, they are used to dry secretions — before airway
procedures such as awake fibreoptic intubation,
and formerly more widely in premedication;
and to reduce excessive secretions in palliative care.
From their central antiemetic action,
hyoscine is used against motion sickness and nausea.
From their bronchodilator action, anticholinergic drugs — the inhaled,
quaternary agents such as ipratropium and tiotropium — are important in the
treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
From their action on the bladder, anticholinergic drugs are used to treat an
overactive bladder. From their effect on the gut, they are used as antispasmodics.
They are also used in ophthalmology, to dilate the pupil; and, importantly,
atropine is an antidote in poisoning by substances that increase acetylcholine —
the organophosphate and other anticholinesterase poisons.
So the anticholinergic drugs have many uses following from their actions:
against bradycardia, in resuscitation;
as antisialagogues for airway procedures and secretions;
against motion sickness and nausea, with hyoscine; as bronchodilators,
with the inhaled agents in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
for the overactive bladder and as gut antispasmodics; in ophthalmology;
and as the antidote to anticholinesterase poisoning — a range of applications
following from their organ effects.
Pull it together: what determines the choice of anticholinergic drug in anaesthetic
practice?
I would draw the anticholinergics together around the principle that,
since the three drugs share the muscarinic-blocking mechanism,
the choice between them rests on their differing properties — chiefly the central
effects, the balance of actions, and the duration — matched to the clinical purpose.
The shared mechanism is the antagonism of the muscarinic receptors,
producing the effects opposite to parasympathetic stimulation — the tachycardia,
the drying of secretions, the smooth-muscle relaxation, and,
for the tertiary amines, the central effects.
The choice then follows the purpose. For the acute treatment of bradycardia,
and in resuscitation, atropine is chosen,
for its rapid onset and strong cardiac action.
For an antisialagogue — to dry secretions before an airway procedure —
glycopyrronium is favoured, for its strong,
long drying action and lack of central effects.
For combination with neostigmine in reversal, glycopyrronium is commonly chosen,
its onset and duration matching the neostigmine and giving smooth cardiovascular
control, and its lack of central effects being an advantage.
Where central effects are to be avoided — particularly in the elderly,
who are susceptible to confusion — the quaternary glycopyrronium is preferred over
the tertiary atropine and hyoscine. Where a central effect is wanted — sedation,
amnesia or antiemesis — hyoscine is chosen.
So the choice of anticholinergic in anaesthesia rests on the differing properties
of the three drugs sharing the muscarinic-blocking mechanism:
atropine for the rapid, strong cardiac action against bradycardia and in
resuscitation; glycopyrronium for the antisialagogue role,
for pairing with neostigmine, and where central effects must be avoided,
as in the elderly; and hyoscine where its central effects — sedation, amnesia,
antiemesis — are wanted — the choice matched to the clinical purpose.
Describe the muscarinic receptors and the basis of the anticholinergic drugs'
selectivity.
The anticholinergic drugs of anaesthesia act at the muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors, and an understanding of these receptors,
and of the drugs' selectivity for them, is worth having,
as it explains the pattern of their effects.
Acetylcholine, the transmitter of the parasympathetic system and of other sites,
acts on two broad classes of receptor:
the nicotinic receptors — at the neuromuscular junction,
the autonomic ganglia and elsewhere — and the muscarinic receptors,
at the targets of the parasympathetic nerves, on the heart,
glands and smooth muscle.
The anticholinergic drugs used in anaesthesia are antagonists selective for the
muscarinic receptors; they do not significantly block the nicotinic receptors.
This selectivity is important: it is why they block the parasympathetic effects on
the heart, glands and smooth muscle,
but do not block transmission at the neuromuscular junction or the ganglia;
and it is why, when given with neostigmine in reversal,
they block the muscarinic effects of the accumulated acetylcholine while leaving
the nicotinic effect at the neuromuscular junction — the reversal of the block —
intact.
The muscarinic receptors are themselves of several subtypes,
found in different tissues; the drugs in anaesthetic use are largely non-selective
among these subtypes, blocking the muscarinic receptors generally,
which is why they produce the full range of antimuscarinic effects rather than a
tissue-selective action.
So the anticholinergic drugs are antagonists selective for the muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors — the receptors at the parasympathetic targets on the
heart, glands and smooth muscle — and not the nicotinic receptors;
this selectivity explaining why they block the parasympathetic effects but not
neuromuscular or ganglionic transmission,
and why they can block the muscarinic effects of neostigmine while leaving its
nicotinic reversal intact; being largely non-selective among the muscarinic
subtypes, they produce the full range of antimuscarinic effects — the receptor
basis of their actions.
Describe the use of atropine in the treatment of bradycardia and in resuscitation.
Atropine's most important acute use is in the treatment of bradycardia and in
cardiac resuscitation, and an understanding of this follows from its cardiac
action, so it is worth describing.
Atropine, by blocking the muscarinic receptors of the heart,
blocks the slowing effect of the vagus nerve on the heart;
so it increases the heart rate and speeds atrioventricular conduction.
This makes it the standard drug for the acute treatment of a symptomatic
bradycardia — a slow heart rate causing haemodynamic compromise — whatever the
cause, whether a drug effect, a vagal reflex, or a conduction disturbance.
It is given intravenously for a rapid effect, and acts within minutes.
In anaesthesia, bradycardia arises in many situations — from vagal stimulation by
surgery, such as traction on the eye or the peritoneum; from drugs,
including the muscarinic effect of neostigmine and the effects of some anaesthetic
agents and opioids; and from reflexes — and atropine is used to treat it.
It is important to note that atropine is most effective against bradycardia
mediated by the vagus, acting on the muscarinic receptors;
a bradycardia from another mechanism,
such as a complete heart block low in the conduction system, may respond poorly.
Atropine has a place in resuscitation algorithms,
though its role has been refined over time.
A small dose may paradoxically slow the heart transiently before the effect
develops.
So atropine, by blocking the vagal muscarinic slowing of the heart,
increases the heart rate and conduction,
and is the standard drug for the acute treatment of symptomatic bradycardia — given
intravenously for a rapid effect — used in anaesthesia against the bradycardia of
vagal surgical stimulation, drugs such as neostigmine, and reflexes;
most effective against vagally-mediated bradycardia,
with a place in resuscitation — a use following from its cardiac action.
Describe the antisialagogue use of the anticholinergic drugs.
The drying of secretions — the antisialagogue action — is a classic use of the
anticholinergic drugs, of value in particular situations in modern anaesthesia,
so it is worth describing.
The anticholinergic drugs, by blocking the muscarinic receptors of the glands,
reduce the secretions of the salivary and bronchial glands,
drying the mouth and the airway — the antisialagogue effect.
This was, historically, an important use,
when the older anaesthetic agents stimulated copious secretions that needed to be
dried to keep the airway clear; with modern agents this is less of a problem,
so routine antisialagogue premedication is no longer used.
But the action retains specific, valuable uses.
The principal modern use is to dry the airway before procedures where secretions
would impede the view or the action — most notably before awake fibreoptic
intubation, where a dry airway is needed for a clear view through the bronchoscope
and for the topical local anaesthetic to work well; an antisialagogue,
given in advance, is valuable here.
It is also used to reduce secretions in other airway procedures,
and in the management of excessive secretions, for instance in palliative care.
Glycopyrronium is generally preferred for this purpose,
being a strong and long-acting antisialagogue,
and — being a quaternary amine — free of the central effects of atropine and
hyoscine; hyoscine is also a strong antisialagogue but with marked central effects.
So the antisialagogue action — the drying of the salivary and bronchial secretions
by muscarinic blockade — was historically important but is no longer used
routinely; its principal modern use being to dry the airway before awake fibreoptic
intubation, for a clear view and effective topical anaesthesia,
and in other airway procedures and palliative secretion management;
glycopyrronium being preferred as a strong,
long-acting antisialagogue without central effects — a valuable specific use.
Describe the central effects of the anticholinergic drugs and their relevance.
The tertiary-amine anticholinergic drugs — atropine and hyoscine — have central
effects, which are both exploited and feared,
and an understanding of these is worth having,
particularly regarding the susceptibility of the elderly.
The central effects depend on whether the drug crosses the blood-brain barrier.
Atropine and hyoscine are tertiary amines,
which cross the barrier and so reach the brain, producing central effects;
glycopyrronium is a quaternary amine, which does not cross,
and so has no central effects — a key distinction.
The central effects are most marked with hyoscine.
They include: sedation and drowsiness; amnesia; and an antiemetic effect,
through actions in the brain. These can be useful — hyoscine's sedative,
amnesic and antiemetic effects are exploited,
for instance in premedication and against motion sickness.
But the central effects are also a hazard. In excess,
or in susceptible individuals, they cause the central anticholinergic syndrome —
restlessness, agitation, confusion, hallucinations and delirium.
The elderly are particularly susceptible to these central effects,
being prone to confusion and delirium from anticholinergic drugs;
this is an important consideration, as the elderly often take, and are given,
drugs with anticholinergic actions,
whose effects are cumulative — the anticholinergic burden — contributing to
confusion.
For this reason, in the elderly, the quaternary glycopyrronium,
without central effects, is preferred over atropine and hyoscine where an
anticholinergic is needed.
So the central effects of the anticholinergic drugs occur with the tertiary amines
atropine and hyoscine, which cross the blood-brain barrier,
but not the quaternary glycopyrronium; comprising, most markedly with hyoscine,
sedation, amnesia and antiemesis — which are exploited — but also, in excess,
the central anticholinergic syndrome of confusion and delirium,
to which the elderly are particularly susceptible,
with a cumulative anticholinergic burden;
so glycopyrronium is preferred in the elderly — central effects both exploited and
feared.
Describe the use of atropine in organophosphate and anticholinesterase poisoning.
Atropine is the key antidote in poisoning by substances that increase acetylcholine
— the anticholinesterase and organophosphate poisons — and an understanding of this
follows from the actions of acetylcholine, so it is worth describing.
The organophosphate compounds — found in some pesticides and nerve agents — and
other anticholinesterases poison by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase,
the enzyme that breaks down acetylcholine;
so acetylcholine accumulates massively at all the sites where it acts,
causing a cholinergic crisis.
The features are those of excessive cholinergic stimulation:
the muscarinic effects — profuse secretions, with salivation, lacrimation,
bronchial secretions and bronchoconstriction, a slow heart, small pupils,
vomiting and diarrhoea, and so on; the nicotinic effects — muscle fasciculation and
then weakness and paralysis; and central effects.
This is life-threatening, chiefly through the respiratory effects — the secretions,
the bronchoconstriction, and the muscle paralysis.
Atropine is the mainstay of treatment for the muscarinic effects: given in large,
repeated doses, titrated to effect,
it blocks the muscarinic receptors and so reverses the dangerous secretions,
bronchoconstriction and bradycardia — the dose required may be very large.
It does not, however, reverse the nicotinic effects — the muscle paralysis — for
which other measures are needed, including a drug that reactivates the enzyme,
and supportive ventilation. So atropine addresses the muscarinic,
but not the nicotinic, crisis.
So in poisoning by organophosphates and other anticholinesterases,
which cause a massive accumulation of acetylcholine and a cholinergic crisis — with
profuse secretions, bronchoconstriction, bradycardia,
and muscle fasciculation then paralysis — atropine is the mainstay for the
muscarinic effects, given in large, repeated,
titrated doses to reverse the secretions, bronchoconstriction and bradycardia;
not reversing the nicotinic paralysis,
for which enzyme reactivators and ventilation are needed — an antidotal use
following from the actions of acetylcholine.
Describe the pharmacokinetics and onset and duration of the anticholinergic drugs.
The selection of an anticholinergic drug depends partly on its onset and duration,
which follow from its pharmacokinetics, so an outline of these is worth giving.
The anticholinergic drugs are given, in anaesthesia, chiefly intravenously,
for a rapid and controllable effect, though they can be given by other routes.
Their onset and duration differ, and these differences guide their use.
Atropine has a relatively rapid onset,
within a few minutes when given intravenously,
which suits it to the acute treatment of bradycardia; its duration is moderate.
Glycopyrronium has a somewhat slower onset and a longer duration of action than
atropine; the longer duration is an advantage when it is paired with neostigmine in
reversal, as its action outlasts the onset of the neostigmine's muscarinic effects,
giving smoother control; and its longer drying action suits the antisialagogue role.
A key kinetic distinction is the ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and the
placenta, which depends on the chemistry: the tertiary amines,
atropine and hyoscine, cross both — reaching the brain, giving central effects,
and crossing the placenta to the fetus — while the quaternary glycopyrronium,
being charged, crosses neither, so it has no central effects and does not cross to
the fetus, an advantage in obstetric use.
The drugs are eliminated by metabolism and excretion.
So the anticholinergic drugs, given chiefly intravenously,
differ in onset and duration: atropine with a rapid onset,
suiting acute bradycardia, and a moderate duration;
glycopyrronium with a slower onset and longer duration,
suiting its pairing with neostigmine and its antisialagogue role; and, kinetically,
the tertiary atropine and hyoscine crossing the blood-brain barrier and placenta —
giving central and fetal effects — while the quaternary glycopyrronium crosses
neither, an advantage centrally and in obstetrics — kinetics guiding their
selection.
Describe the contraindications and cautions for the anticholinergic drugs.
The anticholinergic drugs, through their antimuscarinic effects,
have a number of contraindications and cautions, which follow from their actions,
so they are worth describing. The cautions follow logically from the effects of
muscarinic blockade.
In the eye, by dilating the pupil and impairing the drainage of fluid,
they can raise the intraocular pressure and precipitate an attack of acute
angle-closure glaucoma in susceptible individuals;
so they are used with caution in glaucoma.
On the heart, the tachycardia they cause may be undesirable in patients in whom an
increased heart rate is harmful — such as those with coronary disease,
in whom it increases the oxygen demand.
On the urinary tract, by relaxing the bladder,
they can cause or worsen urinary retention,
a particular concern in older men with prostatic enlargement.
On temperature, by preventing sweating,
they impair heat loss and can cause overheating,
a concern in hot conditions and in children. On the gut, they reduce motility.
Centrally, as discussed, the tertiary amines can cause confusion and delirium,
especially in the elderly, so they are used cautiously,
with glycopyrronium preferred. There is also the cumulative anticholinergic burden
of multiple drugs to consider.
So the choice and dose are tailored to the patient.
So the anticholinergic drugs have cautions following from their antimuscarinic
effects: the risk of precipitating acute angle-closure glaucoma;
an undesirable tachycardia in coronary disease; urinary retention,
especially with prostatic enlargement; impaired sweating and overheating;
reduced gut motility; and central confusion and delirium with the tertiary amines,
especially in the elderly — with the cumulative anticholinergic burden to consider;
so their use is tailored to the patient — cautions following from their actions.
Describe the use of hyoscine and its central actions.
Hyoscine is distinctive among the anaesthetic anticholinergics for its marked
central effects, which determine its particular uses,
so it is worth describing on its own.
Hyoscine — also called scopolamine — is a tertiary amine that crosses the
blood-brain barrier readily, and so has the most marked central effects of the
three drugs, alongside the usual peripheral antimuscarinic actions,
of which it is a strong antisialagogue.
Its central effects are exploited for several purposes.
It is sedative and amnesic, and was historically used as a premedicant for these
effects, often combined with an opioid; the sedation and amnesia were valued,
though the central effects are now often considered a drawback rather than a
benefit, particularly the confusion they may cause.
It has a useful central antiemetic action, particularly against motion sickness,
where it is one of the most effective agents,
and against the nausea of other causes;
it is conveniently given for this by a skin patch, providing a prolonged effect.
Its central effects are also its main hazard: it can cause confusion,
agitation and delirium, particularly in the elderly and in excess,
contributing to the central anticholinergic syndrome.
So its use balances its valued central sedation,
amnesia and antiemesis against the risk of confusion.
So hyoscine, a tertiary amine with the most marked central effects,
is a strong antisialagogue whose central actions — sedation,
amnesia and a useful antiemetic effect, especially against motion sickness,
given by patch — are exploited, while its central effects are also its main hazard,
causing confusion and delirium, especially in the elderly;
a drug distinctive for its central actions, which determine its uses.
Compare the anticholinergic drugs with the beta-blockers and other agents for
managing bradycardia.
Bradycardia in anaesthesia can be managed with anticholinergic drugs and,
in other circumstances, with other agents,
and an understanding of when each is appropriate is worth having,
following from their mechanisms.
Bradycardia — a slow heart rate — has various causes,
and the appropriate treatment depends on the mechanism.
The anticholinergic drugs, chiefly atropine,
treat bradycardia by blocking the vagal, parasympathetic slowing of the heart;
so they are effective when the bradycardia is due to excessive vagal activity — as
from the vagal reflexes of surgery,
or the muscarinic effect of neostigmine — which is the common situation in
anaesthesia, and atropine is the first-line drug.
Where the bradycardia is not vagally mediated, or does not respond to atropine,
other measures are used: drugs that directly stimulate the heart — the
sympathomimetic agents, such as adrenaline or isoprenaline,
which stimulate the cardiac beta-receptors to increase the rate — and,
for a sustained or refractory bradycardia, particularly from conduction block,
cardiac pacing.
The choice thus follows the cause and the response.
It is worth noting that, conversely, the anticholinergic-induced tachycardia,
or other tachycardias, may be treated with beta-blockers,
which slow the heart by blocking the cardiac beta-receptors — the opposite
intervention.
So the management of the heart rate uses these opposing classes according to the
need.
So bradycardia is managed according to its mechanism: the anticholinergic drugs,
chiefly atropine, for the common vagally-mediated bradycardia of anaesthesia,
blocking the parasympathetic slowing;
with sympathomimetic drugs stimulating the heart, and cardiac pacing,
for non-vagal or refractory bradycardia, particularly from conduction block; while,
conversely, tachycardias may be treated with beta-blockers — the choice following
the cause and response, from the drugs' mechanisms.
Atropine appears on the adult advanced life support algorithm.
What is its place there, and what dose is used?
Atropine is indicated for symptomatic bradycardia — that is,
bradycardia producing hypotension, ischaemia,
heart failure or syncope — and for bradyasystolic states with vagal predominance.
The peri-arrest dose is five hundred micrograms intravenously,
repeated every three to five minutes to a maximum of three milligrams,
at which point full vagal blockade is achieved and further atropine is futile.
It acts by antagonising the muscarinic action of the vagus on the sinoatrial node
and atrioventricular node, increasing the rate of pacemaker discharge and speeding
conduction.
It is most effective where the bradycardia is vagally mediated and the conducting
tissue above the His bundle is intact; in high-grade or infranodal block,
such as Mobitz type two or complete heart block with a wide escape,
atropine is usually ineffective and may even worsen matters,
so transcutaneous pacing or an adrenaline or isoprenaline infusion is preferred.
Atropine is no longer recommended in the routine management of asystole or
pulseless electrical activity, because evidence showed no benefit.
A small dose of atropine can paradoxically slow the heart by a weak central or
presynaptic effect before the peripheral vagolytic action dominates.
So atropine remains the first drug for symptomatic vagal bradycardia,
but its ceiling and its failure in infranodal block must be recognised.
The term 'anticholinergic burden' is increasingly used,
particularly in the elderly. What does it mean and why does it matter
perioperatively?
Anticholinergic burden is the cumulative antimuscarinic effect of all the drugs a
patient takes, many of which have anticholinergic activity that is not their
primary purpose — tricyclic antidepressants, certain antihistamines,
antipsychotics, oxybutynin, and others.
Each may contribute a little, but together they can produce a substantial central
and peripheral muscarinic blockade.
Centrally this impairs cholinergic transmission that is already reduced in the
ageing brain, predisposing to confusion, sedation and, importantly,
postoperative delirium and longer-term cognitive decline;
peripherally it causes dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation,
urinary retention and tachycardia.
The elderly are especially vulnerable because the blood–brain barrier is more
permeable, cholinergic reserve is diminished, and clearance is reduced.
Perioperatively this matters because we may add further anticholinergic load —
atropine, hyoscine, and the antimuscarinic given with neostigmine — to an already
burdened patient.
The practical lessons are to prefer glycopyrronium,
which is quaternary and does not cross into the brain,
over tertiary agents such as atropine or hyoscine when an antimuscarinic is
required; to use sugammadex where reversal is needed,
avoiding the antimuscarinic altogether;
and to review and minimise the patient's regular anticholinergic medicines before
surgery.
So the concept reframes these drugs not as individually trivial but as a
collective, modifiable risk for perioperative brain dysfunction.
Antimuscarinics also have a respiratory role. Outline their use as bronchodilators.
Acetylcholine released from vagal efferents acts on muscarinic M-three receptors on
airway smooth muscle to cause bronchoconstriction and on submucosal glands to
increase secretions; antimuscarinics block this and so produce bronchodilatation
and drying.
The agents used are inhaled quaternary compounds — ipratropium,
a short-acting agent, and tiotropium and glycopyrronium,
long-acting agents — chosen because their quaternary structure limits systemic
absorption and central effects, confining the action largely to the airway.
They are a mainstay of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
where vagal tone is a major reversible component of airflow limitation,
and an adjunct in acute severe asthma,
where ipratropium is added to a beta-2 agonist.
Their onset is slower than that of salbutamol,
so they are not the first drug in acute bronchospasm,
but they add useful bronchodilatation and reduce secretions.
Perioperatively, a patient's regular inhaled antimuscarinic should be continued,
and in the rare event of intractable intraoperative bronchospasm,
nebulised ipratropium is a recognised adjunct after volatile agent,
beta-2 agonist and adrenaline.
Older patients using these agents may show mild dry mouth,
and there is a theoretical caution in narrow-angle glaucoma if the drug reaches the
eye. So inhaled antimuscarinics exploit the vagal contribution to airway tone,
and their quaternary design keeps the benefit local.
Thank you. A clear account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The anticholinergic (antimuscarinic) drugs — atropine,
glycopyrronium (glycopyrrolate), hyoscine (scopolamine) — antagonise muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors, blocking parasympathetic effects on heart,
glands and smooth muscle.
Atropine and hyoscine are tertiary amines (cross the blood-brain barrier → central
effects); glycopyrronium is quaternary (no central effects).
Second, Effects (opposite to parasympathetic stimulation):
tachycardia + faster AV conduction;
reduced glandular secretion (dry mouth/airway — antisialagogue);
relaxation of bronchial, gut and bladder smooth muscle; mydriasis,
paralysed accommodation, raised intraocular pressure;
and (tertiary amines) sedation, amnesia, antiemesis, and in excess delirium.
Third, Selection: atropine — rapid,
strong cardiac action for bradycardia/resuscitation;
glycopyrronium — longer-acting antisialagogue, no central effects,
paired with neostigmine, preferred in the elderly;
hyoscine — marked central effects (sedation/amnesia/antiemesis, e.g.
motion sickness) with confusion risk. Fourth, Reversal pairing:
neostigmine inhibits acetylcholinesterase,
accumulating ACh at the NMJ (reverses block,
nicotinic) AND at muscarinic receptors (unwanted bradycardia, secretions,
bronchoconstriction).
An anticholinergic is co-given to block the muscarinic effects — glycopyrronium
with neostigmine, atropine with the faster edrophonium — matched in onset/duration.
5.
Toxicity / central anticholinergic syndrome: 'hot, dry, flushed, dilated pupils,
delirious' — tachycardia, anhidrosis/hyperthermia, urinary retention;
central confusion/agitation/hallucinations (tertiary amines; elderly susceptible).
Managed supportively; physostigmine (crosses the BBB) reverses severe central
effects. Atropine is also the antidote to anticholinesterase (organophosphate)
poisoning.
Thank you. That concludes the station.